From Hansel minutes.com it's Hansel
minutes or weekly discussion with
web developer and technologists. Scott
Hanselman hosted by Carl Franklin. There's
this Lawrence Ryan announcing show number
100 recorded live Tuesday, February 12th, 2008.
Support for Hanselman it's just
provided by. Tellerik already controls
the most comprehensive suite of
components for windows forms and
asp.net web applications. online@wwwdottelerik.com. In
this episode, Scott talks with
Microsoft CTO, norm Juda. Hi,
this is Scott Hanselman and
this is another episode of
Hansel minutes. This is in
fact our 100th show, and
I am lucky enough to
be sitting here at Microsoft
tech ready, six in Seattle,
Washington with norm Juda, the
CTO of Microsoft services. Thank
you, sir, for taking time
out of your busy schedule
to talk to me. Hey
Scott. Nice to be here.
So you're the CTO, chief
technology officer of a very,
very, very large section of
Microsoft. If not, I mean,
we have more than one
CTO, Not inside of the
services organization in the field.
I'm the only one right
now. Okay. So how many
people do you have underneath
you? So Microsoft services is
a worldwide organization spread across
all the geographies from consumer
support all the way through
enterprise support and consulting and
all up mess about 16,000
people. Wow. And that's a
nontrivial number and we're talking
about people in all over
the world. So like your
point is that you might
have MCs, Poland and MCs,
South Africa and MCs, whatever, And
MCs Vietnam. That's just opening
up and Thailand and Latin
America. So it's both big
and small And they have
local MCs people. So if
you're an MTS Thailand, you
might very well be tire.
You could be from anywhere
in the world. Yep. And
as we, as Microsoft opens
up offices around the world,
one of the first part
of the office is we've
got to provide support. If
we're going to sell product,
how do we provide support
and consulting? So very early
in the incubation of new
countries services. Yeah. And these
are people who have their
own culture and their own
style, but at the same
time, the company has to
have its certain culture and
certain style. I mean, when,
when I got hired at
Microsoft, they were asking the
question, I didn't realize this
until after the interview, but
is this a Microsoft hire?
Will he fit in with
the culture we hire for
the, for the, the company,
not for the position. How
do you make sure you
have consistently consistency of talent
of culture across 16,000 people?
Is there actually three dimensions
to the hiring problem? One
is the Microsoft culture, which
is how do we, you
know, the Microsoft type a
personality and Microsoft is not
right for everybody. And so
do you fit into the
company? The second one is,
local culture? And that is
very different. As we expand
through new geographies in Eastern
Europe, Latin America, the local
culture is also very important,
but some work that did
about three years ago inside
of services is to layer
on top of that technical
communities. In other words, if
you're a database guy and
you're in Malaysia, how do
you connect with the database
guy who's in Brazil or
who's in Chicago, who's in
Paris. And so we've led
in this big matrix organization,
both the geography and then
the technical community. So we
provide the connection across those
multiple dimensions. And then we
add industry on top of
that. So any individual, for
example, sits at an intersection
in a multidimensional space of
country, geography, technology industry, maybe
vertical, maybe horizontal. That really
starts to define who you
are as an individual and
how you contribute into the
overall company. That's really interesting.
Now, as someone who builds
a, has built a small
online community, one of the
things that I've tried to
foster is a sense of
positivity, of welcoming, a sense
of if you don't know
the answer it's okay. Is
it that it needs to
be a safe place to
ask questions? Not every culture
in the world values for
lack of better word values
and competence much like, you
know, like the U S
does like some countries do,
do you have any trouble
with people being so good?
And so type a, that,
that aspect of the culture
is, you know what I'm
saying? So We see interesting
behaviors inside of the communities.
We do see a lot
of that. We see those
who contribute into the communities,
those who ask questions, those
who give good answers. We
actually also see the people
who come in and say,
no, no, no, no, no.
This has been answered a
long time ago. Go look
at the fact you can
find to do your homework.
And so communities have to
be self managing. And it
turns out that in the
Microsoft culture, there's enough self
management to spank the people
when they're ill behaved and
to instruct the people when
they need help. Interesting. And
so our communities are about
a thousand people. Each, some
are smaller, some are larger.
And the interesting fact is
how long it took us
to get the communities running.
And we, when we started
it, we went out to
quite a lot of research
on the open source communities
and some of the other
consultant companies, but nobody had
really done what we were
trying to do. We couldn't
find anybody. And so we
did it bottoms up. We
looked at the MVP process,
that's in place sort of
the Microsoft outreach to folks
out in our customer and
partner base. And then we
sort of implemented our own
version of that. And what
we figured out is it
took us about two years
to get it, to be
self sustaining and self feeding.
You have to get to
that critical mass of activity.
And there are a couple
of key things that we
did along the way to
drive that. But once you
get there, you can't stop
it. Once you get over
the edge over the chasm
it become, but you've got
to care and feed for
it. So I have, for
example, reporting to me, community
directors, whose job it is
to care and feed for
those communities and that works.
So you have to have
that self sustaining communities always
have to have some notion
of somebody who's causing it
to happen, not necessarily leading
it, right? Yeah. Kind of
the, the eternal watchmaker, you
know, you build that watch
and you let it work
and you may have to
tune it up a little
bit pointing in a certain
direction, but for the most
part it'll handle itself. So
now as someone who has
a number of years of
history in the business, I
always find it really interesting
to talk to people who've
been in the job in
the business a lot longer
than I have. I've been
doing this about 15 years
and the, the speed at
which things have happened, even
in just my 15 years
from, I mean, I ran
a bulletin board and I
had, you know, if I
had three people dialed into
my bulletin board at once
that level of concurrency and,
you know, multiple chat was
amazing. So I had built
a little community of a
couple of hundred people. And
now you can throw up
a forum board and put
together a community, a couple
hundred people and a couple
thousand spammers within a few
seconds. What is your sense
of history as far as
how community builds over this
last 30 years? I mean,
was it communities where labs
in colleges before in today?
The cultural aspect of communities
is me has just turned
out to be one of
the interesting social engineering problems
that we've tackled deeply. In
this case, the historical perspective
has always been the community
was very local because you
weren't connected, right? So it
was a bunch of guys
who got together for beer
and pizza on Friday. But
what you miss with that
is the diversity of the
community, because the guys who
are getting together for beer
and pizza are all the
people who are in the
same office, in the same
space, in the same geography,
right? The value of community
is the diversity. And, you
know, there are many folks
who look around it's systems
and applications produced in this
country. And I'll typically an
integrity. I do this all
the time, give stereotypical examples
of applications that are not
here. I'll give you a
quick example. We have a
great application that we're writing
in China with one of
the mobile operators in Beijing,
and it's around creating an
instant messaging system, driven off
an SMS backbone. Okay, they're
going to pilot the system
just to test it out.
And the pilot's going to
be with 7 million users. And
if the posit works, then
they'll scale it to about
200 million. And if that works,
they'll then roll it out
to billions. And so the
magnitude of the problem set
is so different that the
diversity of the community is
really important. And you know,
there's always, there's another guy
who's somewhere else who actually
has another interesting aspect on
it. So historically the span
of contact has been the
thing that has changed. What
are the tools that we've
got to be able to
do that? So beyond the
guys, having beer and pizza,
you might've held me vet
that was a North American
event or a European event.
So you would have started
to get some people together
there. So your geographic span
has expanded because of air
travel. And maybe you are
running a dial up bulletin
board, as you say, but
generally the people in the
bulletin board are pretty dedicated.
What you have to do
is make it a natural
way of people's lives for
the community to work. It
has to be, they have
to have a place where
they can go. When they're
in a customer situation, don't
have access to your private
networks. They can get to
that information and get to
it immediately. So the, the
change of the internet and
the immediacy of information, you
have to replicate that in
your community. Because if, if
I can find it quickly,
I'm fine. We had had
a discussion on my blog
a couple of months ago
about the concept of the
third place and the idea
that in the, in social
and sociology, someone needs home
work and elsewhere where elsewhere
is either a bar or
a church or whatever. And
people were saying that for
a lot of people, that
the internet has become that
third place or a blog
or forum and whether or
not that was a healthy
thing. And it's interesting to
see other cultures find that
third place. It's interesting, like
in Africa, in my wife's
from, from Southern Africa and
we've been to Tanzania in
Zimbabwe and South Africa, and the
third place is SMS. It's
Chad and that's amongst people
who don't necessarily have computers,
but that, that sense of
mobile information has been getting
me thinking about that, that
gap between the laptop and
the phone that seems to
need to be failed. And
people keep trying to shove
devices in their Microsoft origami
and different tablets and things
like that. I keep on
keeping I'm kind of rambling,
but I keep wondering if
we're going to have some
kind of a roll up
tablet device, that's going to
give us that four by
six card. Well, I think
the, the interesting thing about
mobile devices across the generations
that you have described is
that the half life of
the device and the rate
of change in the device
far exceeds the laptops that
we've seen. And that the
good thing is that phones
are kind of disposable. It's
a good thing and a
bad thing, cause we not
sure, sure what to do
with these disposable phones and
how we treat the garbage
that we create with that.
But the recycling of the
phones and the generational movements
about the movement that we've
gone from barely connected telephones
into three G phones today,
and then three and a
half and four G phones
and your ability, it's this
immediacy of inflammation contact and
how that is going to
provide access. Either through voice,
you'll talk to your phone
and somebody will come back
to you. And actually it
might be a touring machine.
On the other side, it's
going to come back and
give you this information, but
as people travel around and
as you're not always in
your first place at home,
you actually are still connected.
You'll always be in your
third place. You always have
this notion of partially connected
and connected when I really
need them. Yeah. We've been
watching this community called Twitter
development. And Twitter is, I
mean, other than the fact
that you have to use
your thumb keyboard to get
your 140 characters out, it's
basically a whatever thought is
in your head at the
time somebody goes out on
the wire and the scary
part is that it's archived
for all eternity. Right? Well,
the thing I find fascinating
about this is we've done
a lot of work looking
at the generational aspects of
user experience and the user
experience that we might have
an expectations that we'd might
have a very different to
those of my kids. I
have two kids who are
just in college. Okay. One's
a junior and one's a
freshmen and their ability to
deal with multiple streams of
information concurrently across multiple modalities,
the phone I am music,
and God knows what else
going on. And some of
it's about work, but some
of it is not their
ability to do that as
one thing. And the second
thing is the anonymity of
information that they will publish.
And it's, it's both frightening
and fascinating. Yeah. Yeah. But
the thing I find, the
part that we're interested in
looking at is, so when
that generation, in five years
time, it starts to be
the strength of the workforce.
What are they going to
expect from business applications, from
CRM applications, from it? How
are they going to apply
for a mortgage? It's not
going to be on 11
by 14 pages with 17
signatures on it. It's going
to be different. And so
that's the part that images
I want to come full
circle. Cause you sort of
alluded to this a little
bit earlier on, which is
what does a CTO do,
right? That's one of the
things that a CTO does
is what are the things
that we have to be
doing as a technology company
that empowers the scenario, just
describe what are we going
to do from a tools
perspective, from an infrastructure perspective
that allows those applications to
be built. There's a talk
that I've done periodically, which
is called architectural discontinuity is
in the last mile, which
is what are the architectural
discontinuities that are coming. And
then how do we close
the gap of that architectural
last mile and laying that
out to 16,000 of your
closest friends so that they
can communicate it to their
customers. And here's the problem
set. And by the way,
this is a co as
a company, this is what
Microsoft is going to do
about that. And when you've
got all these cultures and
all these modalities and these
multiple dimensions, and I mean,
at this point, these things
can't be described in a
two dimensional graph anymore. I
mean, we've got more dimensions
than we can visit visualize.
How do you take things
that are just part of
the business? Like, like certifications.
Like if someone says, you
know, all of our customers
are MCs, whatever startup star,
maybe all of our consultants
should be MCs start at
star. I'm sure discussions like
that must must happen, but
maybe they're not appropriate on
a cultural basis. Maybe one
culture doesn't think that testing
is appropriate. I mean, H
those are the kinds of
fights that you, that you
deal with. Cause we have
to deal with that at
our, you know, what am
I going to say? Our
company I've worked at Microsoft
for four months previously to
keep our status. We had
to be a solution developer
or whatever, our MCs people,
It is something that we're
driving. So this event check
ready, which is an integral
Microsoft event for our technical
field. It's sort of like
tech, ed internal. It's the
way of thinking about it.
Exactly. We actually have the
ability for people to take
certification courses. Yeah. And there'll
be about 1200 exams that
people will take by the
way. Not everybody passes the
first time. That's true. I
know that. I know that
too. And so we actually
have a lot of these
things that are going on
here to actually drive that
same level of certification. And,
but we have a double
dimension problem that somebody outside
of Microsoft doesn't have is
one you have to know
about the current set of
products and as a Microsoft
consultant and having come, I
actually joined Microsoft in 1990
as the first architect in
consulting when there were 20
people. Oh, wow. And it's
interesting when you're the Microsoft
consultant and you're inside a
customer, you're the Excel macro
guy, the PowerPoint color-code guy.
You might actually be the
middle tier data architect as
well, but you're Microsoft when
you're there. And the expectation
of the customer is that
you actually know or can
find out about a lot
of stuff. And so there's
this expectation of ambient level
of information, which is almost
impossible to sustain. And then
you have to know about
what's coming and how the
current things, the current technologies
are going to be morphing
and changing of a time
to be something else. And
so the accreditation problem actually
is a necessary, but insufficient
in this case, we've got
to get beyond there, Right?
Yeah. You went exactly where
I thought you were going
to go with that. I
appreciate that. As someone who
worked with large banks in
the, in all over the,
all the U S I
worked for a company that
did banking and we, we
always came up against IBM.
And the joke was in
the early two thousands was
that my IBM developer, my
IBM consulting services person has
20 years of experience. And
my Microsoft consulting person is
20. And, and this was,
this was the case in
the late nineties. And it's,
it's been really interesting to
interact with a lot of
MCs people in the last,
you know, kind of five
to six years that have
really kind of, you know,
hardcore experience 10, 15 years
working in like large banks
in the Northeast and things
like that was that just
a matter of the maturity
of the organization. I mean,
MCs just had to get
older. Well, it's older and
more mature. The problem set
that we're dealing with changes
sort of MCs version one
was about infrastructure, was about
deploying, Oh, it's two at
that time. Yeah. At times,
You know, getting an infrastructure
in place, followed by the
apps today, it's actually very
different today. There's a part
that's about infrastructure. There's a
part about applications. And there's
actually a new initiative that
we're driving. We're just creating
this called engineered for health
is how do you actually
design applications that are built
to be healthy? How do
you design applications that are
built to be green? So
a lot of work that's
going on in that space.
So there's different problems being
solved. And the altitudes, the
level of sophistication in those
problems is different than it
might've been Well writing an
application to be green is
really, I mean, did we
know that the background spellchecker
in word was going to
cost us battery life, right?
And to write an application
that has to deal with
that additional set of input.
We used to think that
input started at the keyboard
and kind of ended it
in the program. And now
you've got other bits of
context flowing in from the
machine. Well, Yeah, there's many
notions about the stimuli that
drive the system, be it
input or remote access or
whatever, but there's also been
this fundamental architectural assumption that
was made with most applications,
which is big stuff at
the middle of the application.
And by the way, the
big stuff is always there.
So it's always synchronous. And
if you're going to build
an application, that's green, that
assumption is no longer valid
because your database might be
quiet for power reasons or
a device might not be
there. You have to wake
it up. And so when
you start to superimpose green
assumptions, your programming model changes
completely. And that your assumption
has to be that the
other guy should be there,
but nine might not be.
And then how do I
wake it up? Wow. See,
this is we're coming to
the end of our time.
And this gets into, I've
got to, I've got to
talk to you and find
someone who can sit down
with me and talk about
green computing, because you just
blew my mind. The, I
mean, I know that the
rise of asynchronously was upon
us, certainly within a world
where it didn't exist previously
in the Microsoft programming model
for a lot of people
grew up in  and
tried to shoe horn, asynchronously
and thing. But now we
have things like WCF and,
and rest models. Wow. He
blew my mind. I have
to go and think about
that. I'll add one more
thing to it, which is
virtualization actually becomes a key
part of that because my
app server might be completely
virtualized. And if I actually
need to add another virtual
image of the app server,
because of load, right. The
consumer of that app seven,
it might have to quiet
us for a minute while
the virtualization engine is actually
provisions and other apps server
that might be in another
geography. Yeah. That's yeah. I
mean, outlook and exchange as
the kind of canonical example,
right? When sometimes this has
been the case where outlooks,
I don't feel like I'm
picking on them, but you
send an email and then
maybe the internet goes down
to the wireless, goes down
and everything stops because putting
a bite on the wire
is a pro a blocking
call, right. That's a challenge.
And it goes all the
way down the stack. It
does. And so we're all
starting to, I think, a
little bit about green and
what it actually means to
our apps. And I'm not
sure that how many, how
much people have thought about
the fundamental changes to the
application architecture. Wow. Well, that's
given me a whole host
of ideas for future shows,
and I know that you've
got another meeting right now,
so I appreciate you sitting
down and talking to me,
this has been another episode
of Hansel minutes and we
will see you again next
week.